---
title: Progress on High Performance MySQL 3rd Edition
author: Baron Schwartz
layout: post
permalink: /2011/10/12/progress-on-high-performance-mysql-3rd-edition/
categories:
  - High Performance MySQL
  - SQL
---
A few people have asked me how it&#8217;s going, so I thought I&#8217;d just share it with everyone. Things are going great. I&#8217;m writing much more quickly than I thought I would be, and as a result I&#8217;m finding I have time to do more changes than I thought I could, which makes me happy. I should be finished drafting the chapters by the end of the year.

In particular, the faster than expected pace is giving me a chance to address one of the big weaknesses of the second edition. In many places, the second edition is a collection of facts and experiences. It says what and why, but it doesn&#8217;t convey a process or method, and it doesn&#8217;t teach you how to think about things and apply the results to situations beyond what the book covers. I&#8217;m finding a number of key areas to remedy that: performance optimization, profiling, indexing, high availability, scalability, and so on. I&#8217;m adding an explanation of the principles and consequences, and actually showing real case studies selected from the most interesting customer issues I&#8217;ve seen at Percona. These illustrate the process or method I explain, and then I wrap that up by pointing out the key bits and reinforcing why they&#8217;re important.

I&#8217;m also adding chapter summaries. Summaries are hard to write. They should synthesize, not restate, the main points, and they should organize the reader&#8217;s thoughts for the transition to the next chapter. I hope I&#8217;m doing a good enough job at this, but it&#8217;s bound to be better than the second edition, which didn&#8217;t have summaries.

Detailed outlining is saving me. After writing the second edition, I realized that I&#8217;d spent about four times as much time rewriting as I did writing. This time I did a lot of outlining before I went to the writing stage, down to the level of individual thoughts and the relationship between them &#8212; nearly prose level, but not quite. Prose is much harder to reorganize and cut-and-paste than bullet points, because it requires correct grammar. Outlining doesn&#8217;t have to be grammatically correct. The effort I put into outlining in exhaustive detail is definitely paying off. When I find a section or chapter that I want to rewrite instead of just updating, and I didn&#8217;t plan for that, I back off and go back to the outlining. It&#8217;s so much more efficient. For example, I just caught myself starting to spin my wheels on partitioning, which is a section that I decide to rewrite to convey a how-to-think approach instead of what-to-think. I noticed the inefficiency, went to the outline in a text file, came back to the chapter, and ended up finishing it very quickly.

Finally, and I never thought I&#8217;d say this, but I&#8217;m using Microsoft Word and it&#8217;s making my life easier. The copyeditors use Word, and I knew I was going to have to use something that reads and writes .doc files eventually, so I decided to just use Word all the way through. I threw up a virtualbox with Windows XP, went out and bought a copy of Word 2010 for $150 or so, and installed it. It runs great in the virtual machine, and it is so much better than Open Office it&#8217;s not even in the same league. It works very well, with a lot of features that really do enhance my productivity. It isn&#8217;t Free Software, but maybe I&#8217;m growing up and coming to terms with the real world: sometimes getting things done is more important than principles, and $150 is less valuable than the time I&#8217;m saving. (I knew that I definitely was not going to use Open Office this time around, no matter what. I was planning on plain-text and Vim. But Word is actually more productive, I believe, by the time I factor in the interaction with the editors and other back-and-forth.)