---
title: Impressions of Fedora 15 with Gnome 3
author: Baron Schwartz
layout: post
permalink: /2011/06/07/impressions-of-fedora-15-with-gnome-3/
categories:
  - Desktop
  - GNU/Linux
  - Review
---
I finally upgraded from Fedora 13 to Fedora 15 on my beloved [ASUS-UL30A-X5][1]. It includes the new Gnome 3, with the &#8220;Gnome Shell&#8221; interface. It&#8217;s quite different from anything else I&#8217;ve used, and you can read lots of positive and negative impressions around the web.

Fedora 15 and Gnome 3 have awesome support for my laptop&#8217;s hardware. It&#8217;s simply flawless. You could not expect better software/hardware integration if you paid thousands of dollars for something from Steve Jobs. Fedora has been great about this for a long time, actually, although there was a video driver problem in Fedora 13 that would sometimes kernel-panic if I did a lot of suspending and resuming combined with plugging and unplugging external monitors. That&#8217;s not a problem I&#8217;ve seen in this release.

This is my work laptop, so it&#8217;s not important whether it&#8217;s cool or exciting. I am generally dealing with a lot of open windows, rapidly switching between them, opening new programs, finding files and directories, and so on. I need the interface to help me with that. So far, results are very positive, with a few things that are either giving me withdrawal pains or simply aren&#8217;t working as well as I need.

If you&#8217;re considering using Gnome 3, don&#8217;t just try it out on a live CD for ten minutes and decide it&#8217;s lame. It&#8217;s completely new and different, and you need to spend a little time actually learning it. You had to learn Mac or Windows or whatever you currently use; if you struggle with Gnome 3 at first, stop struggling and read the documentation for 15 minutes or so. The best and fastest place to get started is with the [cheat sheet][2]. You do things *differently* in Gnome 3. You don&#8217;t have your familiar start menu, taskbar, system tray, desktop icons, and so on. You don&#8217;t use your mouse, in general, although you can if you want to.

The Gnome 3 desktop environment is definitely beautiful and well-done. I&#8217;d say it&#8217;s the best-designed, fastest, best-integrated desktop I&#8217;ve used on Linux, and perhaps all-around the best interface I&#8217;ve used on any platform. (Mac OS X, for example, is very pretty but not very usable IMO, although it&#8217;s getting better these days with the ability to control it more completely without using the mouse. I&#8217;m not a Mac fan, for what it&#8217;s worth.) You can call it eye candy if you wish, and I won&#8217;t argue, but I&#8217;ll point out that it&#8217;s extremely tasteful eye candy. I never felt that KDE&#8217;s eye candy was anything but garish, by contrast.

It&#8217;s extremely easy and efficient to find and open programs in Gnome 3; much better than using a &#8220;start menu.&#8221; Press the &#8220;Windows key&#8221; and type the first few letters of the program&#8217;s name, then press Enter. Done. You can do the same thing to switch between your open windows.

The most important thing for me is managing a lot of open windows while switching between things a lot. This is the nature of my work, not something I&#8217;m doing wrong. I haven&#8217;t gotten used to this yet. I still want to be able to choose a window from the taskbar with my mouse, when I&#8217;m working with a mouse. It&#8217;s nice to be able to switch to a window with the keyboard quickly, but I need both abilities. Some activities, such as web browsing and graphics editing, are more mouse-driven. It&#8217;s most important to me that I don&#8217;t have to switch between the mouse and the keyboard, rather than solely that the keyboard can be used very easily. When I&#8217;m text editing in Vim (100% keyboard driven), the abilities to find and switch to other windows with just the keyboard are awesome. But I need both kinds of usability.

I haven&#8217;t gotten used to the distinction between alt-tab and alt-backtick, for switching between groups of applications and switching between windows within an application group. I might ultimately decide to configure the behavior back to alt-tab&#8217;s old familiar behavior. I don&#8217;t really think of groups of windows as applications/activities in a unit, which I think the Gnome 3 interface really assumes is the case. I group windows by using tabbed interfaces (browser, for example) in most cases; and when I have multiple windows of a single application open, they&#8217;re usually not related. For example, I&#8217;ll have several terminals open, but they&#8217;re not all for one task. I&#8217;m more likely to have Firefox with three tabs open, and three terminals, and an email or two, and a chat window &#8212; and the three terminals all correspond to different activities.

Gnome 3&#8242;s partial answer to this task grouping is completely redesigned workspace support. It&#8217;s awesome &#8212; it&#8217;s the way it always should have worked. But I&#8217;m not quite used to using it yet. I expect to use it a lot more as I relearn/unlearn old habits. In the meantime, when I have several Skype chats open and I want to find one of them, it&#8217;s a bit painful for me because Gnome wants to switch me to Skype, as a whole, rather than switching me to any given chat window. And if one of them is buried and visually not accessible, it&#8217;s hard for me to use the keyboard to get to it.

I use IRC a lot at work. I usually use XChat, but I decided to give the Gnome messaging platform a try. It&#8217;s basically Empathy, tightly integrated into the desktop environment, to make chatting easy and unintrusive. These [videos][3] show how this works. Unfortunately, Empathy isn&#8217;t a very richly featured IRC client, and this is one of those tools that I use so much and so specifically that I have special needs. I was able to tweak Empathy to make it alert me when people mentioned me by name, but I ran out of some other configuration options that I need. XChat lets me create custom key bindings to change my nickname easily, custom highlight words, and so on. From what I can see so far, Empathy doesn&#8217;t have that ability. And I&#8217;ve gotten confused or lost a bit of chat history/context a couple of times when odd things happened, such as the person at the other end of a private message chat changing his nickname. I might just need to learn how to use Empathy better, so I&#8217;m reserving my judgment a bit before I switch back to XChat. But at this point I think that Empathy is better designed for the &#8220;AOL instant messenger&#8221; type of chatting than it is for IRC, with its concept of multiple people in a single channel with changing nicknames.

I had to change one of the default window manager behaviors. My email client (Claws Mail) opens a new window to compose a message, and I have customized Claws to do almost everything with the keyboard. So when I press &#8216;c&#8217;, it opens a new message window. Gnome 3 decided to place this window behind my Claws Mail window, with the focus remaining on the main window, and a notification that my new window is ready to use. But then I have to switch focus to the new window to actually use it. This doesn&#8217;t work for me, so I started gconf-editor and changed the value of /apps/metacity/general/new\_windows\_always\_on\_top. That solved the problem.

I absolutely rely on Revelation for password management, and it has a nice panel applet / widget that I used heavily in Gnome 2. Unfortunately, Gnome 3 has no panels. So I have to use the Revelation program directly, instead of the applet. This is painful. The Revelation interface is not very good. I searched around for another password manager, but couldn&#8217;t find anything better (they all look worse, frankly). I don&#8217;t think that the native Gnome keyring manager is the solution I&#8217;m looking for. I have nearly 200 passwords, and I use dozens of them actively every day &#8212; and the number of paswords probably grows by two or three a week. I would be willing to pay some money for a really good password manager with tight Gnome integration. I&#8217;d love something keyboard-driven, that I can switch my focus to, type a few characters to search for the account I need to use, hit TAB to highlight the password, copy with CTRL-C, dismiss with ESC, and be on my way.

The default Gnome 3 interface is too gray and colorless. Active and inactive windows look the same. It&#8217;s too uniform. I wish the color theme were slightly more imaginative. And the window titlebars are too thick &#8212; it uses too much space. I think all of these things are fixable, but I don&#8217;t see an easy way to change the visual theme from the preferences dialog. I think I need to install some add-on to do this.

That brings up another minor wish: the system and user preferences don&#8217;t seem complete. There isn&#8217;t enough control in the control panel, so to speak. If you search the Web for tweaks, you see a lot of gconf-editor command-line one-liners. This isn&#8217;t good for most users; most people need a graphical utility that groups configuration settings together nicely for them. I assume that this is just because it&#8217;s new, and a lot of the most popular tweaks and add-ons will find their way into the next Gnome 3 release as native, built-in preferences dialogs.

In summary, I really like Gnome 3 and thank the Gnome team very much for creating it. I hope that many of the hiccups I&#8217;ve seen so far are just early-adopter syndrome, and it&#8217;ll get more complete and well-rounded in future releases. I probably need better and more configurable IRC functionality if I&#8217;m going to switch to using the built-in messaging/chat functionality, and I definitely need a better password manager in general. I might also need a taskbar or something similar to help me switch between running applications and windows when I&#8217;m using my mouse to control my computer. But all of this is early impressions, and I&#8217;m trying to learn to be a more skilful Gnome user, so I&#8217;ll see how that goes.

 [1]: http://www.amazon.com/dp/B002P3KMVC?tag=xaprb-20
 [2]: https://live.gnome.org/GnomeShell/CheatSheet
 [3]: http://www.gnome.org/gnome-3/