---
title: "A Review Of The Docker Book"
date: "2014-07-14"
url: /blog/2014/07/14/the-docker-book/
categories:
  - Programming
---

[The Docker Book](http://www.dockerbook.com/) is a newly published book from
James Turnbull, whose name you will recognize if you're at all familiar with
DevOps, Puppet, or Docker itself. It's a nice introduction to what Docker is and
how to get started using it. It's like Goldilocks --- not too detailed, not too
superficial, just right.

The book starts from the basics, assuming no prior knowledge with Docker, or
even most of the core concepts of virtualization, but moves quickly through
these topics into installing Docker and getting started with it. The important
and useful tasks --- starting, stopping, interacting with containers, running
containers as daemons, and so on --- are all covered in the right amount of
detail.

After this, the book switches into building your own images and using them for
real things. There's a couple chapters dedicated to some sample applications.
These aren't silly hello-world applications, either --- we're talking about
real, useful apps, like your own continuous integration system running Jenkins CI.

The final two chapters are about using the Docker API, getting help, and
extending and contributing to Docker itself (it's opensource, of course).

So what do I think? First, great job James. I know it's a lot of work to write a
book like this (275 pages). Second, since Docker is very new, obviously things
are going to change a lot, and in my opinion James has gone into just the right
level of detail, keeping that in mind. The book doesn't feel bleeding-edge to
me, though. It's pretty well thought-out and professionally written, clear and
concise. I have a feeling it will get a lot deeper and more detailed in future
editions, but right now it's a great way to get started with Docker!
